MS.pdf (Pages: 9):

--- Page 1 ---
1 BUSINESS STUDIES (054)  
 Class XII (2024 -25) 
MARKING SCHEME  
Q.NO.  ANSWER  MARKS  
1. A. Management as science  1 
2. D. Assignment of duties  1 
3. C. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are  true, but Reason (R) is not the 
correct explanation of the Assertion.  1 
4. D. Statement II is true, Statement I is false  1 
5. A. Competitive spirit among the existing staff  1 
6. D. Economic and technological environment     1 
7. C. Buy only standardised products  
For Visually Impaired Candidates:  
C. Buy only standardised products  1 
 
1 
8. D. Assertion (A) is false, Reason (R) is true  1 
9. C. Training and development, performance appraisal, promotion and career 
planning, compensation  1 
10. B. controlling helps in ensuring order and discipline  1 
11. D. Size of the assets, Profitability and competitiveness are not affected by 
capital budgeting decisions.  1 
12. D. More than ₹1 crore and not more than ₹10 crore  1 
13. A. (a)-(iii), (b) -(ii), (c) -(i), (d) -(iv) 1 
14. C. Grading  1 
15. C. Induction training  1 
16. D. The provisions of the Consumer Protection Act came into force from 
1981.  1 
17. C. Pricing decision  1 
18. D. (a), (c) and (e) 1 
19. A. Right to be informed  1 
20. A. Both the statements are true . 1 
21. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. (B)  Single Use plans - A single -use plan is developed for a one -time event or 
project. Such a course of action is not likely to be repeated in future, i.e., they 
are for non -recurring situations.The duration of this plan may depend upon 
the type of the project. It may span a w eek or a month or a day.  
Standing plans -A standing plan is used for activities that occur regularly 
over a period of time. It is designed to ensure that internal operations of an 
organisation run smoothly. Such a plan greatly enhances efficiency in routine 
decision -making. It is usually develop ed once but is modified from time to 
time to meet business needs as required.  
OR 
Planning  reduces creativity - Planning is an activity which is done by the 
top management. Usually the rest of the members just implement these 1 ½  
 
 
 
 
1 ½  
 
 
 
 
 
1 ½

--- Page 2 ---
2 plans. As a consequence, middle management and other decision makers 
are neither allowed to deviate from plans nor are they permitted to act on 
their own.Thus, planning in a way reduces creativity since people tend to 
think along the same lines as others.  
 
Planning leads to rigidity -In an organisation, a well -defined plan is drawn 
up with specific goals to be achieved within a specific time frame. These 
plans then decide the future course of action and managers may not be in a 
position to change it. Following a pre -decided plan, when circumstances 
have changed, may not turn out to be in the organisation's interest.   
 
 
 
 
 
1 ½  
 
22. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. (B)  Leadership  is the process of influencing the behaviour of people by making 
them strive voluntarily towards achievement of organisational goals.  
Two situations in which Autocratic leadership is most effective:  
• This leadership style is effective in getting productivity in many 
situations like in a factory where the supervisor is responsible for 
production on time and the supervisor has to ensure labour 
productivity.  
• Quick decision -making is facilitated.  
OR 
Communication  is the process of exchange of information between two or 
more persons to reach common understanding.  
Meaning of formal communication:  
Formal communication flows through official channels designed in the 
organisation chart.  
Meaning of Informal communication:  
Communication that takes place without following the formal lines of 
communication is said to be informal communication.   1 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
1 
 
1 
 
 
1 
 
 
1 
23. Calculation of Return on Investment  (ROI)  
 ROI= Earnings before interest and tax  x100  
                      Total investment  
  ROI =  1500000     x100  
              3000000  
           =50%    
Calculation of Interest Coverage Ratio (ICR)     
 Interest coverage ratio = Earnings before interest and tax 
                                                   Interest  
       ICR =   1500000  
                    120000  
                =12.5 times   
½  
 
½  
 
½  
 
½  
 
½  
 
½  
  
24. (I) Business Environment means the sum total of all individuals, institutions 
and other forces that are outside the control of a business enterprise but that 
may affect its performance.  
(II) It enables the firm to identify opportunities and getting the firs t 
mover advantage: Opportunities refer to the positive external trends or 
changes that will help a firm to improve its performance. Environment 
provides numerous opportunities for business success. Early identification of 
opportunities helps an enterprise to be the first to exploit them instead of 
losing them to competitors  1 
 
 
½ + 1 ½

--- Page 3 ---
3 25. (I) Management is an intangible force: Management is an intangible force 
that cannot be seen but its presence can be felt in the way the organisation 
functions. The effect of management is noticeable in an organisation where 
targets are met according to plans, employees are happy and satisfied, and 
there is orderliness instead of chaos.  
(II) Importance of management: (Any three)  
• Management helps in achieving group goals:  Management is 
required not for itself but for achieving the goals of the organisation. 
The task of a manager is to give a common direction to the individual 
effort in achieving the overall goal of the organisation.  
• Management increases efficiency:  The aim of a manager is to 
reduce costs and increase productivity through better planning, 
organising, directing, staffing and controlling the activities of the 
organisation.  
• Management creates a dynamic organisation: All organisations 
have to function in an environment which is constantly changing. It is 
generally seen that individuals in an organisation resist change as it 
often means moving from a familiar, secure environment into a newer 
and more challenging one. Ma nagement helps people adapt to these 
changes so that the organisation is able to maintain its competitive 
edge.  
• Management helps in achieving personal objectives : A manager 
motivates and leads his team in such a manner that individual 
members are able to achieve personal goals while contributing to the 
overall organisational objective.  
• Management helps in the development of society : An  organisation 
has multiple objectives to serve the purpose of the different groups 
that constitute it. In the process of fulfilling all these, management 
helps in the development of the organisation and through that it helps 
in the development of soci ety.  ½ + ½  
 
 
 
 
 
1 x 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selection tests (Any four):  
• Intelligence Tests:  This is one of the important psychological tests used 
to measure the level of intelligence quotient of an individual. It is an 
indicator of a person’s learning ability or the ability to make decisions 
and judgments.  
• Aptitude Test: It is a measure of an individual's potential for learning 
new skills. It indicates the person’s capacity to develop.  
• Personality Tests : Personality tests provide clues to a person’s 
emotions, her reactions, maturity and value system etc. These tests 
probe the overall personality. Hence, these are difficult to design and 
implement.  
• Trade Test:  These tests measure the existing skills of the individual. 
They measure the level of knowledge and proficiency in the area of 
professions or technical training. The difference between aptitude test 
and trade test is that the former measures the potential to acquire 
skills and the later the actual skills possessed.   
 
1X4=4

--- Page 4 ---
4  
 
 
 
26. (B)  • Interest Tests:  Every individual has a fascination for some job more 
than the other. Interest tests are used to know the pattern of interests 
or involvement of a person.  
OR 
Benefit of training to workers:  
• Improved skills and knowledge due to training lead to better careers for 
the individual.  
• Increased performance by the individual helps him to earn more.  
• Training makes the employee more efficient to handle machines. Thus, 
less prone to accidents.  
• Training increases the satisfaction and morale of employees.   
 
 
 
 
1 
 
1 
1 
 
1 
27. (I) Esteem Needs  
(II) 
• Employee Recognition programmes:  Recognition means 
acknowledgment with a show of appreciation. When such 
appreciation is given to the work performed by employees, they feel 
motivated to perform/work at a higher level.  
• Employee Participation :It means involving employees in decision 
making of the issues related to them. In many companies, these 
programmes are in practice in the form of joint management 
committees, work committees, canteen committees etc.  1 
 
 
½ + 1   
 
 
 
½ + 1  
 
28.(A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28.(B) Plans are prepared for the future and are based on forecasts about future 
conditions. Therefore, planning  involves looking ahead and is called a 
forward -looking function.  
On the contrary, controlling is like a postmortem of past activities to find out 
deviations from the standards. In that sense, controlling is a backward 
looking function.  
However, planning is guided by past experiences and the corrective action 
initiated by the control function aims to improve future performance. Thus, 
planning and controlling are both backward -looking as well as a 
forward -looking function.  
OR 
• Measurement of Actual Performance : Once performance standards 
are set, the next step is measurement of actual performance. 
Performance should be measured in an objective and reliable manner. 
There are several techniques for measurement of performance. These 
include personal observation, sample checking, performance reports.  
• Comparing Actual Performance with Standards : This step involves 
comparison of actual performance with the standard. Such comparison 
will reveal the deviation between actual and desired results. Comparison 
becomes easier when standards are set in quantitative terms.  4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 1½  
 
 
 
 
½ + 1½  
 
29. 
  Features of Planning  
(1)  Planning focuses on achieving objectives:  Organisations are set up 
with a general purpose in view. Specific goals are set out in the plans 
along with the activities to be undertaken to achieve the goals. Thus, 
planning is purposeful. Planning has no meaning unless it contributes to 
the achievemen t of predetermined organisational goals.   
 
1

--- Page 5 ---
5 (2)  Planning is futuristic:  Planning essentially involves looking ahead and 
preparing for the future. The purpose of planning is to meet future events 
effectively to the best advantage of an organisation. It implies peeping 
into the future, analysing it and predicting it. Planning i s, therefore, 
regarded as a forward looking function based on forecasting.  
(3)  Planning involves decision making: Planning essentially involves 
choice from among various alternatives and activities. The need for 
planning arises only when alternatives are available. In actual practice, 
planning presupposes the existence of alternatives. Planning, thus, 
involves thoroug h examination and evaluation of each alternative and 
choosing the most appropriate one.  
(4)  Planning is a mental exercise: Planning requires application of the mind 
involving foresight, intelligent imagination and sound judgement. It is 
basically an intellectual activity of thinking rather than doing, because 
planning determines the action to be taken. However, planning requir es 
logical and systematic thinking rather than guesswork or wishful thinking.  1 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
30. Following are the differences between advertising and personal selling  
(any four):  
S.No.  Advertising  Personal Selling  
1. Advertising is an impersonal form 
of communication  Personal selling is a 
personal form of 
communication.  
2. Advertising involves transmission 
of standardised messages, i.e., 
the same message is sent.  In personal selling, the sales 
talk is adjusted keeping view 
of the customer's 
background and needs.  
3. Advertising is inflexible as the 
message can’ t be adjusted to the 
needs of the buyer.  Personal selling is highly 
flexible. as the message can 
be adjusted.  
4. It reaches masses, i.e., a large 
number of people can be 
approached.  Only a limited number of 
people can be contacted 
because of time and cost 
considerations.  
5. In advertising the cost per person 
reached is very low.  The cost per person is quite 
high in the case of personal 
selling.  
6. Advertising can cover the market 
in a short time.  Personal selling efforts take 
a lot of time to cover the 
entire market.  
7. Advertising makes use of mass 
media such television, radio, 
newspaper, and magazines.  Personal selling makes use 
of sales staff, which has 
limited reach.  1X4=4

--- Page 6 ---
6 8. Advertising lacks direct feedback. 
Marketing research efforts are 
needed to judge customers’ 
reactions to advertising  Personal selling provides 
direct and immediate 
feedback. Sales persons 
come to know about the 
customers’ reactions 
immediately  
9. Advertising is more useful in 
creating and building interest of 
the consumers in the firm's 
products.  Personal selling plays an 
important role at the 
awareness stage of decision 
making.  
10. Advertising is more useful in 
marketing to the ultimate 
consumers who are large in 
numbers.  Personal selling is more 
useful in selling products to 
the industrial buyers or to 
intermediaries such as 
dealers and retailers who 
are relatively few in number.  
 
31. (I)  Securities Exchange Board of India(SEBI)  
(II)  Objectives of SEBI are (Any three)  
• to regulate the stock exchanges and the security industry to 
promote their orderly functioning.  
• to protect the rights and interest of the investors, particularly 
individual investors to guide and educate them.  
• to prevent trading Malpractices and achieve a balance between 
self regulation by the security industries and its statutory 
regulation.  
• to regulate and develop a code of conduct and fair practices, by 
intermediaries like brokers, merchant  brokers etc. with a view of 
making them competitive and professional.  
 (III) Developmental functions: (Any two)  
• Training of intermediaries of the securities market.  
• Conducting research and publishing information useful to all market  
participants.  
• Undertaking measures to develop the capital markets by adapting a 
flexible approach.  1 
 
 
 
1✕3=3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1x2=2 
 
32. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Difference between Functional and Divisional structure  
Basis  Functional Structure  Divisional Structure  
(I) Formation  Formation is based 
on functions  Formation is based on 
product lines and is 
supported by functions. 
Specialisation  
(II) Specialisation  
 Functional 
specialisation.  Product specialisation.   1X6=6

--- Page 7 ---
7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. (B)  (III) Responsibility  Difficult to fix on a 
department.   Easy to fix responsibility for 
performance  
(IV)Managerial 
Development  Difficult, as each 
functional manager 
has to report to the 
top management.  Easier, autonomy as well as 
the chance to perform 
multiple functions helps in 
managerial development  
(V) Cost Functions are not 
duplicated hence 
economical.  Duplication of resources in 
various departments, hence 
costly.  
(VI) Coordination  Difficult for a 
multiproduct 
company  Easy, because all functions 
related to a particular 
product are integrated in one 
department.  
 OR 
SIGNIFICANCE OF DELEGATION:  
(i) Effective management: By empowering the employees, the managers are 
able to function more efficiently as they get more time to concentrate on 
important matters.  
(ii) Employee development:  As a result of delegation, employees get more 
opportunities to utilise their talent and this may give rise to latent abilities in 
them.  It makes them better leaders and decision makers.  
(iii) Motivation of employees:  Delegation helps in developing the talents of 
the employees. It also has psychological benefits. Responsibility for work 
build the self -esteem of an employee and improves his confidence.  
(iv) Facilitation of growth:  Delegation helps in the expansion of an 
organisation by providing a ready workforce to take up leading positions in 
new ventures.  
(v) Basis of management hierarchy: Delegation of authority establishes 
superior -subordinate relationships, which are the basis of hierarchy of 
management.  
(vi) Better coordination:  The elements of delegation help to define the 
powers, duties and answerability related to the various positions in an 
organisation. This helps to avoid overlapping of duties and duplication of 
work.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1X6=6  
 
33. Various techniques used by Leena to improve the performance of her 
employees:  
Method Study -The objective of method study is to find out one best way of 
doing the job. To determine the best way there are several parameters.   
Right from procurement of raw materials till the final product is delivered to  
the customer every activity is part of method study. Taylor devised the 
concept of assembly line by using method study.  The objective  is to minimise 
the cost of production and maximise the quality and satisfaction of the 
customer.  
Time Study -It determines the standard time taken to perform a    well -defined 
job. The standard time is fixed for the whole of the task by taking several  
 
 
½ + 2 ½  
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 2 ½

--- Page 8 ---
8 readings. The method of time study will depend upon volume and frequency 
of the task, the cycle time of the operation and time measurement costs.  
The objective of time study is to determine the number of workers to be 
employed; frame suitable incentive schemes and determine labour costs.  
34. (A) Following are the four elements of marketing mix:  
1. PRODUCT:  Product means goods or services or ‘anything of value’, 
which is offered to the market for sale.  The concept of product relates to 
not only the physical product  but also the benefits offered by it from 
customer’s view point. It also includes the extended product or what is 
offered to the customers by way of after sales services, handling 
complaints, availability of spare parts etc.The important product 
decisions include deciding about the features, quality, packaging, 
labelling and branding of the product s. 
2. PRICE : Price is the amount of money customers have to pay to obtain 
the product. In the case of most of the products, the level of price affects 
the level of their demand. The marketers have not only to decide about 
the objectives of price setting but to analys e the factors determining the 
price and fix a price for the firm’s products. Decisions have also to be 
taken in respect of discounts to customers, traders and credit terms, etc., 
so that customers perceive the price to be in line with the value of the  
product.  
3. PLACE:  Place or Physical Distribution include activities that make a 
firm's products available to the target customers. Important decision 
areas in this respect include selection of dealers or intermediaries to 
reach the customers, providing support to the inter mediaries (by way of 
discounts, promotional campaigns, etc.). The other decision areas relate 
to managing inventory, storage and warehousing and transportation of 
the goods from the place it is produced to the place it is required by the 
buyers.  
4. PROMOTION: Promotion of products and services include activities that 
communicate availability, features, merits, etc., of the products to the 
target customers and persuade them to buy it.  Most marketing 
organisations use a number of tools such as advertising, personal 
selling and sales promotion techniques like price discounts, free 
coupons etc.   
 
½ + 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 1  
 
 
34. (B)  OR 
 Factors affecting price of a product: ( any four)  
1. Product Cost:  One of the most important factors affecting the price of a 
product or service is its cost. This includes the cost of producing, distributing 
and selling the product. The cost sets the minimum level or the floor price at 
which the product may be sold.In th e long run, a firm cannot survive unless 
at least all its costs are covered. There are broadly three types of costs: viz  
Fixed Costs, Variable Costs and Semi Variable Costs.  
2. The utility and demand : While the product costs set the lower limits of 
the price, the utility provided by the product and the intensity of demand of 
the buyer sets the upper limit of price, which a buyer would be prepared to 
pay. The buyer may be ready to pay up to the point w here the utility from the 
product is at least equal to the sacrifice made in terms of the price paid.   
 
 
 
 
 
(½ + 1)  
 x 4

--- Page 9 ---
9 3. Extent of competition in the market:  The price will tend to reach the 
upper limit in case there is lesser degree of competition while under 
conditions of free competition, the price will tend to be set at the lowest level.  
4. Government and legal regulations: In order to protect the interest of 
public against unfair practices in the field of price fixing, Government can 
intervene and declare a product as essential product and regulate it’s price. 
In such a case, the Government does not allow the firms to charge  such a 
high price and intervene to regulate the price of the product.  
5. Pricing objectives : Apart from profit maximisation, the pricing objectives 
of a firm may include: (a) Obtaining Market Share Leadership: If a firm's 
objective is to obtain larger share of the market; it will keep the price of its 
products at lower levels so that greater num ber of people are attracted to 
purchase the products; (b) Surviving in a Competitive Market: If a firm is 
facing difficulties in surviving in the market because of intense competition or 
introduction of a more efficient substitute by a  competitor, it may resort to 
discounting its products or running a promotion campaign to liquidate its 
stock; and (c) Attaining Product Quality Leadership: In this case, normally 
higher prices are charged to cover high quality and high cost of research an d 
Development.  
6. Marketing Methods Used:  Price fixation process is also affected by other 
elements of marketing such as distribution system, quality of salesmen 
employed, quality and amount of advertising, sales promotion efforts, the 
type of packaging, product differentiation, credit facility a nd customer 
services provided.
