SQP.pdf (Pages: 8):

--- Page 1 ---
1 BUSINESS STUDIES (054)  
CLASS XII (2024 -25) 
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER  
 
TIME: 3 HOURS                                                                         M.M. – 80 
• This question paper contains 34 questions.  
• Marks are indicated against each question.  
• Answers should be brief and to the point.  
• Answers to the questions carrying 3 marks may be from 50 to 75 words.  
• Answers to the questions carrying 4 marks may be about 150 words.  
• Answers to the questions carrying 6 marks may be about 200 words.  
 
Q.NO.  QUESTION  MARKS  
1. The newly appointed Production Manager of Saheb Ltd., a firm manufacturing 
toys, Mr Ahrawat noticed that the workers in the factory were not giving their 
best as the physical conditions in the factory were not good. He conducted an 
experiment to see the effect of improvement in the physi cal conditions in the 
factory on the performance of the workers, by providing adequate ventilation 
and water facilities. He observed that the fatigue level of the workers reduced.  
 The nature of management being highlighted in the above case is:  
A. Management as science  
B. Management as profession  
C. Management as art  
D. Both A. and C. 1 
2. Jasmine Ahluwalia is the manager of an artefacts museum's marketing team, 
responsible for promoting exhibitions and events. In the previous season, she 
defined the total work of managing the events into graphic designing, 
registration inquiries, bill payments, etc, in order to facilitate specialisation. 
However, instead of allocating work, she had assigned each team member the 
full responsibility of managing the promotion of an en tire event. In spite of 
holding regular team meetings to take feedback, Jasmine found problems 
throughout the events season in the quality of graphic design, registration 
inquiry, bill payments, etc,.  
For the upcoming events season, Jasmine has decided to divide these 
responsibilities on the basis of her observation of the areas in which the  
individual team members have excelled in the  previous season and allocate 
the roles based on their skills and competencies.  
 Identify the step in the organising process which was not  properly performed 
in the previous season but has been duly performed for the upcoming season.  
A. Identification and division of work  
B. Establishing reporting relationships  
C. Departmentalisation  
D. Assignment of duties  1 
3. Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose the 
correct alternative from those given below:  1

--- Page 2 ---
2 Assertion(A):   Financial Planning aims at enabling the company to tackle 
the uncertainty in respect of the availability and timing of the funds.  
Reason(R):   Capital structure refers to the mix between owners’ and borrowed 
funds  
Alternatives :  
A. Both Assertion (A) is false and Reason (R) are true.  
B. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are false.  
C. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not 
the correct explanation of the Assertion.  
D. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, and  Reason (R) is the 
correct explanation of the Assertion.  
4. Read the following statements carefully:  
Statement I:  Secondary Market directly promotes capital formation.  
Statement lI:  Capital market deals in medium and long term securities such 
as equity shares and debentures.  
In the light of given statements, choose the correct alternative from the 
following:  
A. Both the statements are true.  
B. Both the statements are false.  
C. Statement I is true, Statement II is false.  
D. Statement II is true, Statement I is false.  1 
 5. Choose the statement that correctly highlights the benefit of using external 
sources of recruitment.  
A. Competitive spirit among the existing staff  
B. Reduction in employees turnover  
C. Helps in increasing employees satisfaction  
D. Develops a sense of security amongst employees  1 
 
 
6. Goodwill Enterprises is a large -scale automobile manufacturer, who fulfil ls the 
needs of both industrial users and consumers. The company is providing easy 
finance facilities at a low rate of interest, which has considerably increased the 
demand for the product.  The company has installed a new branch 
management software to efficiently manage and coordinate activities across 
their multiple branches and locations.  
Identify the components of the business environment from the above case 
study.  
A. Political and economic environment  
B. Economic and social environment  
C. Technological and legal environment  
D. Economic and technological environment      1 
7. 
  1

--- Page 3 ---
3 Identify the responsibility that a consumer fulfills  when he looks for the quality 
marks given above:  
A. Assert yourself to ensure that you get a fair deal  
B. Getting a proper receipt  
C. Buy only standardised products  
D. Be honest in your dealings  
 
For Visually Impaired Candidates:  
When a consumer looks for FPO mark while purchasing a bottle of jam or 
hallmark when purchasing jewellery, which consumer responsibility has he 
kept in mind:  
A. Assert yourself to ensure that you get a fair deal  
B. Getting a proper receipt  
C. Buy only standardised products  
D. Be honest in your dealings   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
8. Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose the 
correct alternative from those given below:  
ASSERTION (A):  Controlling can prevent deviations . 
REASON (R): Controlling helps in minimising deviations by taking actions 
and decisions that  reduce their recurrence.  
A. Both Assertion (A) and Reason  (R) are true and Reason is the correct 
explanation of Assertion.  
B. Both Assertion(A) and Reason  (R) are true and Reason is not the 
correct explanation of Assertion.  
C. Assertion (A) is true, Reason (R)  is false . 
D. Assertion(A) is false, Reason(R) is true .  1 
9. ‘Joining a job marks the beginning of socialisation of employees at the 
workplace. The employee should be given a post for which he has been 
selected.’  
Place the subsequent steps of staffing in a small organisation in  the correct 
order:  
A. Training and development, promotion and career planning, 
performance appraisal, compensation  
B. Performance appraisal, training and development, promotion and 
career planning, compensation  
C. Training and development, performance appraisal, promotion and 
career planning, compensation  
D. Training and development, performance appraisal, compensation, 
promotion and career planning   1 
10. Spiceworks,  a company providing financial services to its clients is keeping a 
close check on the employee’s activities by using biometric and retina 
scanning as modes of accessing the office premises, in order to ensure greater 
security of information in the organisa tion. 
Choose the correct point of significance of controlling highlighted above:  
A. controlling helps in achievement of organisational goals  
B. controlling helps in ensuring order and discipline  
C. controlling helps in improving employees motivation  
D. controlling enables optimum utilisation of resources  1

--- Page 4 ---
4 11. Identify the incorrect statement with respect to  ‘Investment decision’:  
A. Net working capital refers to excess of current assets over current 
liabilities  
B. Current assets are those assets which get converted into cash within 
one year  
C. Capital budgeting decisions are irreversible.  
D. Size of the assets, Profitability and competitiveness are not affected 
by capital budgeting decisions.   1 
12. State Commission has the jurisdiction to entertain complaints where value of 
goods and services paid as consideration is ________  
A. More than ₹1 crore and not more than ₹ 5 crore  
B. More than ₹10 crore  
C. Less than ₹1 crore  
D. More than ₹1 crore and not more than ₹10 crore   1 
13. Match the statements given in column I with the characteristic of business 
environment given in column II  
 COLUMN I   COLUMN II  
(a) Increased demand of Khakhra and Thepla 
in the region of Gujarat as compared to 
Delhi region  i. Uncertainty  
(b) Digital academic certificates are issued to 
students accessible in a secured manner to 
eliminate undesirable practices like 
corruption and manipulation of records 
under Digital India Initiative. Such 
technological improvements are happening 
at a very fast pace.  ii. Dynamic  
(c) Fashion market is facing both opportunities 
and challenges. Therefore it is difficult to 
predict the future of the fashion market . Iii. Relativity  
(d) A new government will result in changing 
government rules, fiscal policies, market 
conditions etc  Iv. Interrelatedness  
Choose the correct option from the following:  
A. (a)-(iii), (b) -(ii), (c) -(i), (d) -(iv) 
B. (a)-(ii), (b) -(i), (c) -(iii), (d) -(iv) 
C. (a)-(iv), (b) -(ii), (c) -(i), (d) -(iii) 
D. (a)-(iii), (b) -(i), (c) -(ii), (d) -(iv) 1 
14. The process of classification of products into different groups, on the basis of 
some of the important characteristics such as quality, size, etc. is known as:  
A. Branding  
B. Standardisation  
C. Grading  
D. Marketing planning   1

--- Page 5 ---
5 15. Shiwakumar runs a legal consultancy firm in Chhattisgarh. Whenever the firm 
hires new employees, on the first day of joining, they are welcomed to the 
organisation and are given details about the dress code, lunch timings, 
introduction to daily operations and fellow colleagues. They are also 
familiarised with the organisational policies and procedures, emergency exits, 
evacuation procedure, etc.  
Name the type of training which is provided by Shiwakumar in his firm.  
A. Apprenticeship training  
B. Vestibule training  
C. Induction training  
D. Internship training   1 
16. Identify the incorrect statement with respect to Consumer Protection in India.  
A. It not only includes educating consumers about their rights and 
responsibilities but also helps in getting their grievances redressed  
B. It not only requires a judicial machinery for protecting the interest of 
consumers but also requires the consumers to get together and form 
themselves into Consumer associations for protection and promotion of 
their interests.  
C. It is the moral duty of any business to take care of consumers' interest 
and avoid any form of exploitation.  
D. The provisions of Consumer Protection Act came into force from  
1981.   1 
17. Identify the decision which is not taken under financial management.  
A. Dividend Decision  
B. Capital Budgeting Decision  
C. Pricing Decision  
D. Both B. and C.  1 
18. What are the factors that affect financing decisions?  
(a) Cash flow position of the company  
(b) Stability of earnings  
(c) Degree of financial risk  
(d) Contractual constraints  
(e) State of capital market  
(f) Level of competition  
Choose the correct alternative from the following:  
A. (b), (c) and (f) 
B. (d), (e) and (f) 
C. (a), (c) and (d) 
D. (a), (c) and (e) 1 
19. Consumers can ask anything regarding the date of manufacturing, MRP, etc, 
about the product that he intend  to buy.  
Identify the  consumer right highlighted in the above lines.  
A. Right to be informed  
B. Right to be assured  
C. Right to be heard  
D. Right to safety  1 
20. Read the following statements carefully:  
Statement I : Cost of debt is lower than cost of equity for  a company.  1

--- Page 6 ---
6 Statement II : The objective of financial management is to increase 
shareholder’s wealth.  
In the light of given statements, choose the correct alternative from the 
following:  
A. Both the statements are true.  
B. Both the statements are false.  
C. Statement I is true, Statement II is false.  
D. Statement II is true, Statement I is false . 
21.(A) 
 
21.(B)   
 State the meaning of single use plans and standing plans  
OR 
State how planning  
(I) reduces creativity  
(II) leads to rigidity.   3 
 
 
1 ½  
1 ½  
22. (A) 
 
 
22. (B)  Explain the concept of leadership. Give two situations in which autocratic 
leadership style is most effective.  
OR 
Explain the concept of communication. Give the meaning of formal and 
informal communication.   3 
 
 
3 
23. From the following information regarding Aditya Ltd. which is in the business 
of manufacturing green tea, calculate the Return on Investment and Interest 
Coverage Ratio of the company: (Show working)  
Earning before interest and tax                                  ₹ 15,00,000  
10% debentures                                                         ₹ 12,00,000  
Equity Share Capital ( ₹10 each)                                ₹ 18,00,000  
Tax Rate                                                                             40%  3 
24. Mr Vivek Vaswani, a foodpreneur  combined his passion for food with his 
entrepreneurial skills and started his innovative fast food outlet OH CHILLI! in 
2021. He had started his career as a food blogger and had noticed that 
numerous Indian consumers were  looking  for reasonable and pure vegetarian 
fast food options for dining out. The high end restaurants were not opted by 
many as they were exorbitantly priced. Though many global fast food chains 
were running across the country, yet not many outlets offered  reasonable and 
healthy pure vegetarian fast food options to consumers. OH CHILLI! became 
a pioneer in offering a healthy and delicious variety of food.  
What came as a surprise for consumers was that even without using onion or 
garlic in the pasta sauce, marinade and ketchup ,the food could actually taste 
great.  The company witnessed an increase in  net profit of 26% in its second 
financial year and became a market leader.  
(I)  State the concept of business environment.  
(II)  Identify and explain in what way, a good understanding of business 
environment enabled Mr. Vivek Vaswani to improve the performance of the 
enterprise.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
  
 
25. The General manager of a reputed organisation, Mr. Agastaya Lokhande, 
made the following announcement at the Annual General Meeting of the 
company - “When we think of a brand,  we think of reputation, but the reputation 
is made or broken by the quality of p roducts and customer representation. If 
people are miserable, they can't give their best work and the brand suffers. On

--- Page 7 ---
7 the contrary, positive results can be observed if there is job satisfaction, 
effective and efficient functioning.”  
(I) Identify and explain the  feature of management discussed by Mr Agastaya 
in his announcement.  
(II) Explain any three reasons that make management important to any 
organisation.   
 
1 
 
3 
26. (A) 
 
 
 
26. (B)  
 In order to streamline the selection procedure, so as to minimise the margin 
of errors, certain tests are carried out that attempt to measure the 
characteristics of individuals. Explain any four such tests.  
OR 
Since jobs have become more complex, the importance of employee training 
has increased.  Training programmes provide numerous benefits to workers.  
Explain any four points that support this statement.   4 
 
 
 
 
4 
27. When Bhaanupriya joined as technical head of Logic Lotus Innovators, she 
was keen on increasing the productivity and profitability of the company. 
However, she observed that the employees were demotivated as no attention 
was given to their work.  Also, the  workers were given little freedom to make 
decisions.  
Bhaanupriya decided to stimulate the employees  by giving each worker T -
shirts with their name on it. She also decided to include workers in work 
committees. This helped in improving the performance of the workers.  
(I) On the basis of the understanding of Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory 
of motivation, identify the human need that Bhaanupriya has recognised  
in order to make the subordinates act towards achievement of 
organisational goals.  
(II) Identify and explain two incentives that have been provided by 
Bhanupriya to improve the performance of the employees.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
3 
28. (A) 
 
 
28. (B)  Explain how Planning and controlling are both backward looking, as well as  
forward looking functions.  
OR 
The first step in the controlling process is setting up performance standards. 
Explain the subsequent two steps in the process of controlling.   4 
 
 
4 
 
29. When Chandrashekhar Shukla returned to India after completing a Certificate 
course in Food Quality Assurance and Quality Control from the Netherlands, 
he was convinced that he would fulfil his grandfather's dream of converting 
their 58 acre land into a fer tile farm. He started by setting out specific goals 
and laid down related activities to be performed to achieve the goals. Soon 
he launched his own company ‘Food and Agribusiness Solutions Private 
Limited’.  
He sought to ensure that the future events effectively meet the best interest 
of the company. He prepared an annual statement for production and sales, 
based on sales forecasting. He noticed that the farmers grew only paddy due 
to which land remained idle for the subsequent 8 to 9 months of the year. He 
identified and assessed various alternatives through which farms could be 
utilised for the remaining months of the year.  
Through his accurate vision, judgement and systematic thinking based on 
analysis of the facts, he presented a scheme to the farmers where both paddy 
and vegetables could be grown.  4

--- Page 8 ---
8 Identify and explain the features of one of the functions of Management 
highlighted above.   
30. Give any four points of difference between advertising and personal selling.  4 
31. It was established by the Government of India on 12 April 1988 as an interim 
administrative body to promote orderly and healthy growth of the securities 
market and for investor protection. It was given statutory status in 1992 
through an Act of Parliament.   
(I)  Identify the regulatory body which has been highlighted above.  
(II)  State the three objectives of the regulatory body identified in part ( I). 
(III)  State any two functions that are performed for the development of the 
securities market by the regulatory body identified in part ( I).      
 
 
 
1 
3 
2 
 
32. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. (B)  Differentiate between functional structure and divisional structure on the basis 
of: 
(I) Formation    
(II) S pecialisation  
(III) Responsibility  
(IV) Managerial development  
(V) Cost 
(VI) Coordination  
OR 
‘Delegation helps a manager to extend his area of operations as without it, his 
activities would be restricted to only what he  himself can do.’  
In light of the above statement, explain how effective delegation helps the 
organisation in achieving objectives.   6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
33. Leena has been appointed as the Operations Manager in a small trading 
company dealing in garments, with growing online sales. The company has 
recently rented space in a warehouse to store garments and mail out orders. 
In order to take over the responsibili ties of order fulfilment, Leena promotes an 
associate,  Kushagra to the post of Inventory and Order fulfilment  Supervisor. 
Kushagra has been given the task to assess whether it is best to process 
orders as they come in or let them accumulate and then to pr ocess them in 
batches. He concludes that accumulating and then processing them in 
batches is the best way of fulfilling orders, in order to minimise cost and 
maximise customer satisfaction.  
Through several readings Leena  finds that the standard time taken from the 
placement of order to the delivery of garments for a batch of  100 pieces is 72 
hours.  This helped her to determine the labour cost.  
On the basis of the understanding of concepts of scientific management,  
identify and explain the techniques used by Leena and Kushagra to improve 
the performance of the employees.   6 
34. (A) 
 
34. (B)  Explain the four elements of marketing mix.  
OR 
Explain any four factors affecting determination of the price of a product or 
service.   6 
 
6
